[FLINK-22159][FLINK-22302][docs][table] Restructure SQL "Queries" pages and add docs for the new window TVF based operations (#15642)
apache/flink: docs/content/docs/dev/table/sql/queries/window-tvf.md

---
title: "Windowing TVF"
weight: 6
type: docs
---
<!--
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
distributed with this work for additional information
regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
"License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

  http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
software distributed under the License is distributed on an
"AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations
under the License.
-->

# Windowing table-valued functions (Windowing TVFs)

{{< label Streaming >}}

Windows are at the heart of processing infinite streams. Windows split the stream into “buckets” of finite size, over which we can apply computations. This document focuses on how windowing is performed in Flink SQL and how the programmer can benefit to the maximum from its offered functionality.

> Apache Flink provides several windowing table-valued functions (TVF) to divide the elements of your table into windows, including:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apache Flink provides several window table-valued functions (TVF) to divide the elements of your table into windows, including:
```

- [Tumble Windows](#tumble)
- [Hop Windows](#hop)
- [Cumulate Windows](#cumulate)
- Session Windows (will be supported soon)

Note that each element can logically belong to more than one window, depending on the windowing table-valued function you use. For example, HOP windowing creates overlapping windows wherein a single element can be assigned to multiple windows.

> Windowing TVFs are Flink defined Polymorphic Table Functions (abbreviated PTF). PTF is the part of the SQL 2016 standard which is a special table-function, but can have table as parameter. PTF is a powerful feature to change the shape of a table. Because PTFs are semantically used like tables, their invocation occurs in a `FROM` clause of a `SELECT` statement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Windowing TVFs are Flink defined Polymorphic Table Functions (abbreviated PTF). PTF is part of the SQL 2016 standard, a special table-function, but can have a table as a parameter. PTF is a powerful feature to change the shape of a table. Because PTFs are used semantically like tables, their invocation occurs in a `FROM` clause of a `SELECT` statement.
```

See more how to apply further computations based on windowing TVF:
- [Window Aggregation]({{< ref "docs/dev/table/sql/queries/window-agg" >}})
- [Window TopN]({{< ref "docs/dev/table/sql/queries/window-topn">}})
- Window Join (will be supported soon)

## Window Functions

Apache Flink provides 3 built-in windowing TVFs: TUMBLE, `HOP` and `CUMULATE`. The return value of windowing TVF is a new relation that includes all columns of original relation as well as additional 3 columns named "window_start", "window_end", "window_time" to indicate the assigned window. The "window_time" field is a [time attributes]({{< ref "docs/dev/table/concepts/time_attributes" >}}) of the window after windowing TVF which can be used in subsequent time-based operations, e.g. another windowing TVF, or <a href="{{< ref "docs/dev/table/sql/queries/joins" >}}#interval-joins">interval joins</a>, <a href="{{< ref "docs/dev/table/sql/queries/over-agg" >}}">over aggregations</a>. The value of `window_time` always equal to `window_end - 1ms`.

### TUMBLE

> The `TUMBLE` function assigns each element to a window of a specified window size. Tumbling windows have a fixed size and do not overlap. For example, if you specify a tumbling window with a size of 5 minutes, the current window will be evaluated and a new window will be started every five minutes as illustrated by the following figure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `TUMBLE` function assigns each element to a window of specified window size. Tumbling windows have a fixed size and do not overlap. For example, suppose you specify a tumbling window with a size of 5 minutes. In that case, Flink will evaluate the current window, and a new window started every five minutes, as illustrated by the following figure.
```

| 2020-04-15 08:11 |  3.00 | B    | 2020-04-15 08:10 | 2020-04-15 08:20 | 2020-04-15 08:19:59.999 |
| 2020-04-15 08:13 |  1.00 | E    | 2020-04-15 08:10 | 2020-04-15 08:20 | 2020-04-15 08:19:59.999 |
| 2020-04-15 08:17 |  6.00 | F    | 2020-04-15 08:10 | 2020-04-15 08:20 | 2020-04-15 08:19:59.999 |
+------------------+-------+------+------------------+------------------+-------------------------+

-- apply aggregation on the tumbling windowed table
Flink SQL> SELECT window_start, window_end, SUM(price)
  FROM TABLE(
    TUMBLE(TABLE Bid, DESCRIPTOR(bidtime), INTERVAL '10' MINUTES))
  GROUP BY window_start, window_end;
+------------------+------------------+-------+
|     window_start |       window_end | price |
+------------------+------------------+-------+
| 2020-04-15 08:00 | 2020-04-15 08:10 | 11.00 |
| 2020-04-15 08:10 | 2020-04-15 08:20 | 10.00 |
+------------------+------------------+-------+
```

*Note: in order to better understand the behavior of windowing, we simplify the displaying of timestamp values to not show the trailing zeros, e.g. `2020-04-15 08:05` should be displayed as `2020-04-15 08:05:00.000` in Flink SQL Client if the type is `TIMESTAMP(3)`.*

### HOP

> The `HOP` function assigns elements to windows of fixed length. Similar to a `TUMBLE` windowing function, the size of the windows is configured by the window size parameter. An additional window slide parameter controls how frequently a hopping window is started. Hence, hopping windows can be overlapping if the slide is smaller than the window size. In this case elements are assigned to multiple windows. Hopping windows is also known as "sliding windows".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `HOP` function assigns elements to windows of fixed length. Like a `TUMBLE` windowing function, the size of the windows is configured by the window size parameter. An additional window slide parameter controls how frequently a hopping window is started. Hence, hopping windows can be overlapping if the slide is smaller than the window size. In this case, elements are assigned to multiple windows. Hopping windows are also known as "sliding windows".
```

> For example, you could have windows of size 10 minutes that slides by 5 minutes. With this you get every 5 minutes a window that contains the events that arrived during the last 10 minutes as depicted by the following figure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, you could have windows of size 10 minutes that slides by 5 minutes. With this, you get every 5 minutes a window that contains the events that arrived during the last 10 minutes, as depicted by the following figure.
```

| 2020-04-15 08:17 |  6.00 | F    | 2020-04-15 08:15 | 2020-04-15 08:25 | 2020-04-15 08:24:59.999 |
+------------------+-------+------+------------------+------------------+-------------------------+

-- apply aggregation on the hopping windowed table
> SELECT window_start, window_end, SUM(price)
  FROM TABLE(
    HOP(TABLE Bid, DESCRIPTOR(bidtime), INTERVAL '5' MINUTES, INTERVAL '10' MINUTES))
  GROUP BY window_start, window_end;
+------------------+------------------+-------+
|     window_start |       window_end | price |
+------------------+------------------+-------+
| 2020-04-15 08:00 | 2020-04-15 08:10 | 11.00 |
| 2020-04-15 08:05 | 2020-04-15 08:15 | 15.00 |
| 2020-04-15 08:10 | 2020-04-15 08:20 | 10.00 |
| 2020-04-15 08:15 | 2020-04-15 08:25 |  6.00 |
+------------------+------------------+-------+
```

### CUMULATE

Cumulating windows are very useful in some scenarios, such as tumbling windows with early firing in a fixed window interval. For example, a daily dashboard draws cumulative UVs from 00:00 to every minute, the UV at 10:00 represents the total number of UV from 00:00 to 10:00. This can be easily and efficiently implemented by CUMULATE windowing.

> The `CUMULATE` function assigns elements to windows that cover rows within an initial interval of step size, and expanding to one more step size (keep window start fixed) every step until to the max window size.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `CUMULATE` function assigns elements to windows that cover rows within an initial interval of step size and expand to one more step size (keep window start fixed) every step until the max window size.
```
